Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the All Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, it is April 15th.
>> Yes.
>> Happy tax day to all who observe.
>> I'm so annoyed. I just Speaking of
taxes, I'm pro-taxes, but I just had an
email with my accountant and anyway, I'm
in a bad mood.
>> I'm pro-taxes. I resent the fact that we
have to like actually file them in this
massive bureaucratic exercise every
year. But anyway,
>> This has nothing to do with what we're
talking about.
>> Well, okay, taxes, you know, financial
flows of a sort.
>> Well, taxes create demand for currency.
Core
principle right there.
>> There we go. Okay, well, let's see. It
is April 15th. The situation in Iran
still highly uncertain, very fluid, but,
you know, we have seen higher oil prices
in general. We've seen people getting
oil from new sources, new parts of the
world, and we've seen a lot of people
reaching back to the 1970s oil shock as
a sort of historic analogy for what we
might be experiencing now.
>> Right. Absolutely. I mean, obviously,
again, in the context of like today,
April 15th, versus like say version of
this conversation that we might have
even had like two weeks ago, things are
a little bit calmer right now. But we
absolutely do not know that they're
going to actually have a durable
ceasefire, and so forth. Obviously, oil
prices have come down. Nonetheless, it's
a pretty big oil jump from where we
were, say, in the middle of February.
Even at that point, oil prices might
have been pricing in some sort of Iran
war premiums. It's even further jump
from that. And so, yes, we've had this
really big oil shock. And in addition,
we might have a some sort of shift in
the global balance of power particularly
if Iran is a toll keeper in some way of
the stream of commerce.
>> Right. So, this is exactly it. And one
of the reasons I mentioned the 1970s oil
shock is because that moment is very
intertwined with financial history and
the development of the financial system
itself. And we've done a number of
episodes on the history of petrodollars
and eurodollars. We had a great series
with Josh Younger before. And so, I
think when you have a moment like this
where people are bringing up those
analogies and we can get into whether or
not those are the correct analogies to
make.
>> Yeah.
>> It kind of generates this longer-term
discussion about what the financial
system is actually going to look like
and where financial flows are actually
going to go to.
>> Totally right. And you know, one of the
things that I'm thinking about like some
of our old conversations like we used to
have with Zoltan Poszar for example. And
who is like, you know, one of the things
that connected dollar dominance was this
idea of well, the US Navy is what
policed the high seas and made global
trade flow and stuff like that. If that
is under question of whether the US
actually can keep um ships going in the
way they were,
how does that change the equation? What
if it happens to be the case that to go
from one place to another, you need to
pay in Chinese yuan instead of dollars?
All kinds of interesting things that
arise about the relationship between
power and currencies at a moment of
crisis.
>> Right. And if you're paying for oil in
yuan, does that mean that you're going
to save that like money in non-dollar
reserve assets or are you just going to
put it like right back into treasuries?
All right. There are a lot of questions
that we have about this current moment.
Obviously, everything's still highly
uncertain, but who do we call when we're
trying to untangle uncertain global
flows? One man, and that is Brad Setser.
He is of course the Whitney Shepardson
Senior Fellow at the Council on Foreign
Relations. Uh man who holds the title of
most Odd Lots appearances, I think, at
this point.
>> love about Brad is there has never been
a crisis in which he doesn't have some
relevant expertise to bring to bear.
>> That's right. Uh Brad, welcome back to
Odd Lots. Thanks so much for coming on.
>> I know, thanks for having me back.
>> So, why don't we just start with that
historic analogy, the 1970s oil shock.
Lots of ink currently being spilled on
whether or not that's the correct
parallel for our current crisis
experience, but
in your view, how much does this
particular oil shock resemble that of uh
I guess 50 years ago now?
>> I mean, not Okay, well, there's the
obvious parallel in the sense that the
'70s oil shocks, you know, '73 was a
function of the Yom Kippur War, Israel,
the Arab nations' reactions to the that.
The second oil shock in 1979 was, you
know, a function of the Iranian
Revolution.
Uh so, same geographic region, different
in the sense that the US and Israel are
the instigators.
And different in the fact that so far,
at least, the magnitude of the shock is
not at all comparable. Now, it's not at
all comparable in price terms. In '73
and then in '79, oil doubled or tripled.
And by the end of the decade, oil had
gone up by
well, six, seven times
in dollar prices, less in real terms.
We've only gone up, whatever, 50% max
from uh spot oil. I mean, sort of uh for
Brent and for WTI and the next month
future. It's a little higher for
delivery in Asia,
but we are not yet at the magnitude of
the shock that we were in the 1970s. The
obvious point is our economy as a whole,
for the US and for the world, is a
little less oil-dependent, but I
wouldn't push that too far.
So, I think the main distinction is, you
know, we sort of started it,
the US and Israel. We, in theory, can
end it, although we would only end it if
Iran
finds its own equilibrium, which it
allows other countries oil to pass
through the strait.
And at least so far, the market has not
anticipated
that this will need the same kind of
jump in price to balance supply and
physical interruption of the flow of
oil, some of your guests have been on
here have noted.
>> Yeah.
>> We're similar, maybe even worse. So, in
the we're kind of in this weird world
where the physical interruption is
bigger, the price reaction is smaller.
>> I'm glad you brought this up. I would
just love your take on this in
particular. You talk to the commodity
guys like we do, and they're like, this
is crazy, this is the biggest shock
ever.
Guys like me, I'm a efficient markets
guys like, hey, I just see what's on the
screen. It looks like it's not that big
of a deal.
You be the third-party arbiter here. How
do you make sense of the gap between
what we see on our screen versus the
shortfall in physical barrels, 20
million every single day that aren't
coming to the market?
>> Well, it's not quite 20.
>> Okay, okay. You're right, there's been
>> It's somewhere between a 10 and 15.
>> Okay.
>> Which which happens to be between 10 and
15% of global supply, happens to be
between 20 and 30% of global traded oil.
It is still a massive massive massive
shock. And my elasticity would imply a
much bigger increase in price if that
was a sustained expected interruption.
Look, I think you end up
dealing with the reality that oil is
close to being a perfectly fungible
commodity, but it is not a perfectly
fungible commodity.
A North Atlantic barrel can only get to
China or Japan with a long trek around
the world.
>> Yeah.
>> So, there's an extra shipping cost.
A lot of the barrels in the North
Atlantic are sweet and light. Light, uh,
just as, you know, how vicious, you
know, easy to flow, like a measure of
the weight of the oil, sweet, less
sulfur.
And, you know, a lot of the refiners in
Asia were set up to refine medium sour.
And for some things you want heavier
grades of oil cuz you get more
diesel out of the heavier grades.
And you you know, refiners just
configured for different grades of oil.
So, you when you interrupt the flow,
fundamentally the flow from the Gulf
countries to Asia, there's no immediate
instantaneous substitution for barrels
in the North Atlantic.
I think that's first point. Second point
is what people think of as traded oil is
not actually the oil for delivery
tomorrow.
It is the futures contract for the next
month, next month after that. The world
could look completely different.
The US
has within its ability
the capacity to kind of pull back. And
if the US pulls back, and maybe the
Iranians insist on a toll,
there is no shortage of oil that could
come out. Now, it'll take a little
longer now cuz of the physical
destruction of some of the export
facilities in the Gulf. But if you don't
have this particular
choke point strangled, oil the old
global oil market was very, very well
supplied. So, I think the futures market
has to balance between one possibility,
which is that there is plenty of oil 2-3
months out, and oil is on a trajectory,
not immediately cuz of the you know, the
damage and everything else, back to 60,
and another possibility where this
persists and oil's at 150 or above. And
the markets have trouble figuring that
one out.
>> Yeah. So, okay, speaking of oil at 150
potentially, one of the key differences
between now and I guess the 1970s is
that the higher oil price is not
necessarily accruing to the Petro
states, right? Because if you're the UAE
or someone like that and you can't
physically get as much oil out, then
you're not generating as much money and
so you're not recycling that money into
potentially US bonds or I guess nowadays
US stocks and things like that. And if
you think back to the 1970s and the
birth of the Petro dollar market, you
know, it was because they were making a
lot of money that they had to put
somewhere.
>> Just talk to us on a very simplistic
basis about who is actually like making
money, whose current account is
benefiting from higher oil prices right
now?
>> Well, you made the key point, which is
that the usual winners, like the big
winners from Russia in '22, the big
winners when Libya went offline, big
winners with some periods of Iran
sanctions, big winners with some of the
periods of tighter Venezuela sanctions,
are the countries in the Gulf. They have
the most oil.
And they also have some of the lowest
break even prices, so any, you know, oil
above 60 means a big current account
surplus.
Those countries are not going in a
position to capture this windfall. So,
you've kind of taken
Kuwait, Iraq,
UAE
out of the picture. The Saudis like
at the margin cuz they can get some oil
out, but they can't get as much oil out
and they actually had a really high
break even. They're a current account
deficit country. They need a $100 barrel
oil with 7 million barrels a day of
exports in order to break even.
They're going to get 100 maybe they're
going to get a higher price, so they can
make it up with 5 million.
But, you know, in the Gulf countries are
just not the winners. Russia should win.
The Ukrainians are doing their best to
kind of limit the amount of Russian oil
that gets to the market. The Kazakhs
will win. All the stans that can export
oil will win. Nigeria will win. Angola
will win.
All the South American oil exporters
will win. And then, you know, the
biggest locus of production outside of
the Gulf, even bigger than the
production in, you know, the West
Siberian fields of Russia, are the in
the in the US South Southwest, Texas,
and then in Alberta.
So, you know, North America is
producing,
you know, well over 25 million barrels a
day, exporting
five to the rest of the world. And while
it's mostly a transfer from American
consumers to American producers, that is
one of the biggest shifts in the global
economy. I left out Norway. So, Norway
really, really really bends, especially
if gas prices go up. It is the salt
Brunei. You know, it's it's the smaller
oil exporters who aren't at don't fit
your mental mental image of the petro
chic.
>> I'm looking at the dollar How do you
pronounce the tenge? Do you know the
Kazakh the How do we pronounce the
>> Tenge's good.
>> the tenge? I'm looking at the dollar
tenge cross, which is the Kazakh
currency. It's been doing very well. And
in fact, actually, the the tenge or
dollar tenge, which is how I think
you're supposed to quote it, hit its low
in the very early April, which sort of
coincides with the peak of some of these
fears, at least in the local terms. So,
your intuition or your description of
who are some of the big winners seems to
be matched in the market.
>> We need a catchy nickname for dollar
tenge, like like cable. That's not that
catchy, is it?
>> No, you know what we need? We need like
an acronym for the non-Gulf state
non-sanctioned oil powerhouses. So,
like we need like
Kazakhstan, Angola. Who Who are What was
another one you said?
>> Nigeria, Colombia,
Ecuador.
>> Yeah, the cankers or something like
that. We need
This is good. We'll We'll We'll play
around with this. We'll we'll workshop
this later.
Let's zoom back in time for a second cuz
we brought up the 1970s, but if you
know, okay, there's obviously
differences. How did the 70s reshape the
world? Like fundamentally, okay, you
have these oil shocks, etc. and people
then start talking about these things
called petrodollars is a word that comes
into existence, but in what sense is you
know, did those shocks
what kind of legacy did they leave on
the global financial system?
>> Well, they had a real legacy. You know,
you going into the 1970s, oil was so
bloody cheap. People burned it for
electricity.
>> Yeah.
>> And going into the 1970s, Americans
drove which we now have gone back to
doing, honking big cars, you know,
massive Cadillacs with big fins. So, you
know, 15 years later, very little oil is
being burned for electricity.
You substitute for cheaper forms of
fossil fuels, more nuclear
>> They still burn oil for electricity in
New England because they're so
anti-climate change that they refuse to
build a natural gas pipeline. So, they
burn oil instead. Anyway, sorry, keep
going. It just
>> And and for a long time in Puerto Rico,
I mean, there there were there's also
islands cuz oil is very
>> energy dense and easy to transport.
>> Yeah.
>> And look, we did move to smaller
Japanese cars away from the big three
massive cars from the 1960s. So, there
is like a very real set of adaptation in
the economy. The economy becomes less
oil intense because it was such a huge
increase in the price of oil. Americans
were very unhappy if you remember in the
1970s. It was not good for President
Carter
when the Iranian Revolution, you know,
there was the the hostages, but the the
oil shock did not help his popularity.
And Americans in general are very, very
unhappy when oil prices are high. It's
one of our national quirks.
But then in the short run at that time,
there was this a huge windfall into the
Gulf states. The Gulf states piled up
dollars, and they were dollars. Most
oil, you know, oil was priced in dollars
before 1973. It didn't take a deal to
price oil in dollars. The US had been
the biggest producer of oil in the
1930s. We were the supplier of oil to
the Brits and others during World War
II. You know, it was only over the
course of the 1950s and 1960s do other
parts of the world kind of catch up with
US oil production. But the US the oil
industry in a deep sense was born in the
United States, and it was always priced
in dollars.
And the Gulf countries, and you know,
Saudi Aramco was originally uh a joint
venture with an American company,
yeah, or maybe even fully owned by an
American company, I don't forget. So, it
was natural it was priced in in dollars.
Oil, it wasn't like in the 1970s you had
to do a new deal to price oil in dollars
rather than something else. Oil was in
dollars.
Those dollars piled up,
and it was a period of difficulty in the
international monetary system. The US
was going off the gold standard. The
Bretton Woods was breaking down. High,
you know, inflation was not well
contained after the first oil shock.
And there was an effort to convince the
Saudis to keep their large stock of new
petrodollars in dollars, not buy euros,
and use them at least in part to buy
treasuries. Now, even then the Saudis
were a little reluctant to visibly buy
treasuries.
And you know, the some Bloomberg
reporters several years ago went through
this history, and the US started masking
who was buying treasuries at the request
of the Saudis.
Because the Saudis, you know, well,
like, you know, you guys are supporting
Israel. We don't really want to be
buying your bonds directly. Can you hide
it? And we agreed. And then because
there was still this residual tension
between the US and many of many parts of
the the the Arab world, a lot of the
dollars did not flow into the Treasury
market. They flowed into bank accounts
in London, offshored
effectively eurodollars originating from
petro states.
And then those got recycled, and they
got lent
in no small part to oil importing
emerging economies. And that is sort of
viewed as the start of
the buildup of the vulnerabilities that
led to the Latin American debt crisis in
the 1980s.
Now, there's another part of this whole
story that I think people forget, which
is sort of like been on my mind and it's
irritating me.
After '79-'80, Saudis had built up huge
huge huge huge stocks of dollars. They
had, you know, great great decade for
the Saudis in the 1970s.
In the '80s, in order to keep prices
high, they had to cut production.
And then eventually, that didn't wasn't
enough,
and the oil price collapsed.
And by the end of the 1980s, and
certainly by the middle of the 1990s,
all the dollars that had been built up
in the 1970s
had been spent. The Saudi cumulative
current account balance went back into
basically being neutral or into a
deficit by '95. Certainly was there by
2000. So, in some sense,
the petrodollar boom came and it went.
By the time of the Asian financial
crisis, oil prices were very very low,
in the '20s. And there was not a There
were no flows of petrodollars, nor was
there a very large stock of
petrodollars. So, there's sometimes a
tendency to think the '70s just
continued continued continued.
And the reality is,
setting aside the really rich Emirates
and Kuwait, the rest of the oil
exporters were not in a position to
continuously build up and save over most
of the period after 1980. Until until we
get, you know, the big run-up in oil
from '03 to '14.
>> The '03 to '14 run-up in oil, then talk
to us about where those dollars actually
went. What types of assets? Cuz my sense
is that happens to coincide with the
very moment that a lot of the wealthy
Gulf states were talking about
diversifying into things like tech
stocks.
>> Uh equities generally. I think there's
two stages. At the very beginning of the
run-up in oil prices, there are an awful
lot of countries that remember basically
being out of money in '98 and '99 when
oil prices collapsed, when Russia
defaulted. The Saudis were almost out of
reserves, too.
And so the first stage is, you know,
we're rebuilding our precautionary
balances,
at least in the biggest, most visible
countries, Russia and Saudi Arabia. Now,
it's a little different in
Abu Dhabi, the biggest emirate, the one
with the most oil. And in Kuwait, you
know, Kuwait had to make up for the the
first Gulf War and some of the
destruction. But in Abu Dhabi and Qatar
with his gas,
they from the beginning had felt they
had a decent precautionary buffer and
started doing the sovereign wealth fund
style investments, more into
alternatives, more into equities.
As time goes on,
the Saudis build up a bigger buffer and
they conclude they have enough reserves,
and then they start doing a mix of
spending at home and buying equities
and taking direct stakes in companies.
Over time, the Emiratis, who used to be
kind of conservative and behind the
scenes, just put the money in audia,
invest in a fairly diversified
portfolio, don't take controlling
stakes. They become very active
investors looking for the home run.
The royals become more involved in the
management. It's a little bit less of a
an outpost of London professional fund
managers and a bit more of a playground
of some of the younger shakes.
And then, you know, it kind of varies
across the world. The Norwegians build
up a massive professionally run
sovereign wealth fund, which is a
predictable portfolio balance. And since
equities have gone up over the past 4
years, all the new flow has gone into
bonds because they hit a predictable
target.
And then the Russians actually started
off building up dollars.
But then they got worried about, you
know, their political relationship with
the US. The reset with Obama didn't
really work. They even before Crimea and
the Donbass, they had taken their
reserves dollar reserve share down to 40
or 50.
And then after the Donbass, they took
their reserves dollar reserve share down
to we now know to be basically zero.
They certainly took everything out of US
custodial accounts.
So you do see diversification over time
across currencies and then even more so
across assets.
Now, the last point I make, and this is
just sort of to be provocative cuz I'm
tired of people blah blah blah-ing about
the dollar as a global reserve currency
and how that's the foundation of
everything.
Remember this.
An international
large cap equity portfolio
will have a US share of roughly 2/3,
65-70%.
The Saudi public investment fund, my
friend Alex Etra has done some work on
it. It's international portfolio has a
dollar share of 80.
And that's probably typical cuz most
private equity funds are going to be
mostly pretty dollar heavy.
A typical global reserve portfolio is
now at 57% dollars.
So the notion that reserves are the
source of inflows into dollars is a bit
dated. A reserve portfolio will
typically have a lower dollar share than
a standard
return-seeking
equities fund, which just because of the
outperformance of US large caps
will be more overweight dollars.
>> Joe, mildly annoyed Brad is the best
Brad.
I think. We should ask a question about
the IMF report on global imbalances.
I want to No, no, we have a lot to talk
about.
>> Well, I mean, actually, can you just
expand on this further? So, we look
around the world and we see that
actually reserve portfolios are
arguably, or all things equal, maybe
underweight dollars. Was that always the
case? Is there a structural reason for
that? Like, what's the story behind this
mismatch? I didn't actually realize
that.
>> Well, reserves can be managed for safety
and liquidity and not for return.
>> I see.
>> And so, the pressure to get the most
returns is weaker. So, you don't have to
chase the tech stocks. You don't have to
match an index and if you're don't have
the tech stocks, you're underperforming
the index, you're underperforming your
benchmark. Your benchmark as a reserve
manager will be more bespoke.
>> Yeah.
>> Higher priority on, you know, safety and
liquidity. That's observation one.
Observation two, and this is this is
where things get funky. You know, a
quarter of global reserves, to the first
approximation, are in China.
Now, China still manages its currency
against the dollar, but China, as a
matter of policy, brought its reserves,
former reserve dollar reserve share
down, last disclosed number down to 55%
from 79%
in 2005.
They did not like the optics of
financing their strategic rival and
holding a lot of Treasuries in visible
ways.
Now, that's a bit misleading because the
dollar share of the
portfolios of the state banks, which now
have a very large share of the total
state portfolio,
is much higher, 70%. And if you actually
net out the offshore liabilities of the
state banks, and just look at the net,
the euro offshore portfolio is matched
by euro offshore liabilities, so that
nets out. The dollar offshore are
matched by dollars onshore. So, in a
sense, the BOP flow through the state
banks was almost setting aside some of
the CNY lending, which has gone up, was
like 100% dollars.
Like a Taiwanese life or portfolio, one
of my other favorite topics, would be
95% dollars. You remember central banks
are holding reserves as an asset against
liabilities, money that don't pay
interest. And some have to sterilize, so
they don't have the same pressure to
generate returns. And so therefore, they
can hold lower-yielding
safer assets. And a couple of big
players, China and Russia, just didn't
want to be too heavy dollars.
>> God,
there's so many things now that I'm
thinking about we could like different
avenues I want to ask Brad about. But
just since you mentioned Taiwanese life
insurance companies, that got me
thinking about East Asia a little bit.
I'm just curious like
have you ever seen anything like what's
going on with South Korea right now? I
always think it's because East Asia and
my word, it's just like this insane I
mean, this is a real obviously like a
big generally rich developed economy by
and large, and it's just having this
insane growth spurt both in the stock
market and actually the real economy
because of how the incredible margins
and sales it's getting on essentially
memory chips right now. Like is there
any analogy that comes to mind for what
we're witnessing here right now?
>> Um not that comes to immediately to
mind. I mean,
I mean, a huge growth in exports.
>> Yeah.
>> Very rapid real growth, particularly in
Taiwan, actually, but narrow. One sector
expanding
and then weakening currency. You know,
you have growth outperformance, you have
a
terms of trade positive shock from the
semiconductor prices.
And then you have a weak currency. And
then you have an economy like last year
all of the outflow from Korea
that matched the current account surplus
was into equities. A third of that was
from their national pension fund, so a
policy flow. Two-thirds of it was just
retail and retail decided, even though
Samsung is making money hand over fist,
that they preferred to hold US tech
stocks. So, I now I haven't seen
anything like it. I mean, what is also
interesting right now is that Korea is a
very petroleum-intensive economy, a lot
of petrochems, energy-intensive
industries in addition to the memory
chips.
And so, and it's energy-poor, fossil
fuel-poor. So, it is on the one hand
benefiting from this giant positive
shock, memory chip surge in price, surge
in demand, AI is helping Samsung print
money hand over fist. And then the
economy's on the receiving end of a
pretty big negative shock
>> Yeah.
>> because of the loss of oil flow. And so,
you know, we've sort of stayed in a
That mix has kept the won weak. The
The interesting thing to me is that the
Koreans are now starting to complain
that the won is too weak, despite being
in a country that historically likes a
weak currency for exports. And the
National Pension Service has just
announced they're going to expand their
hedging program.
I hope they succeed. The world economy
does not benefit from won at 1,500 and
an even
bigger Korean surplus over time.
>> Well, we'll have to bring back former
All Thoughts guest Hyun Song-shin to
talk about all of this.
>> Good luck. I mean, he's sign. a
promotion.
>> He has a He has a good
job these days.
>> I just refer to him as former All
Thoughts Guest from now on and forever.
Just going back to the dedollarization
idea, as you point out, there's a lot of
nuance with reserve portfolios. And then
one of the things you always see when it
a headline comes out saying that, you
know, foreign countries reduce their
share of US Treasuries is this idea of
the custodial accounts and maybe we're
not getting a full picture of exactly
what they're buying.
When it comes to gauging
dedollarization,
I'm doing air quotes, no one can see me
because this is a podcast, but like what
are you actually looking at to score and
gauge whether that's a real trend and
whether or not it's accelerating over
the past 5 weeks or so?
>> It's hard to track in real time. I mean,
the the obvious indicator is if the
world is dedollarizing, they're going to
be buying fewer dollars and the dollar
should be falling in value, which it
generally is not.
So, I mean, I think that's
that's the simple high-frequency metric.
To me, it is very difficult to have a
credible story around dedollarization
when the dollar is strong, not weak
relative to history,
and when the total dollar claims on the
US, including dollar-denominated equity
claims, have continued to increase.
And so,
in 2025,
the world was longer dollars than it was
in 2024 despite all the hot air spent
talking about dedollarization.
Uh
function of the fact that we have a
current account deficit over over a
trillion dollars, so we have to sell a
trillion of financial assets, and we are
not selling euro or yen or
yuan-denominated claims to the world.
So, last year was sort of financed 50/50
with dollar debt and US equities, which
implicitly settle in dollars. So, in
that sense, I find it a silly
discussion.
>> In order to de-dollarize, the world has
to stop funding the US in dollars.
Now, there's a whole bunch of other
things that can happen around the world,
and there is a small sub-trend where
some emerging market borrowers are
borrowing in yuan to save money.
And so, I think that is an interesting
cross-current, but it is a modest
cross-current.
The sanction countries, of course, don't
use dollars or euros to settle payments
because they cannot. Now, in general,
they seem to want to get rid of the
sanctions. They're not saying, "Oh, this
has been great. We are so lucky that we
have to settle payment in yuan and sell
our oil to China at a discount." They
generally would like to say, "Well, we
would love to be unsanctioned to sell in
dollars and to have a competitive market
for our our oil, not just some monopsony
buyer in China."
But look, they you know, you look for
indicators of movements of changes in
hedge ratios.
You look for individual countries or
individual institutions that have
changed their portfolio allocation in a
meaningful way.
And I think over the past 9 months,
there was decent evidence that some of
the Scandinavian pension funds,
institutional investors,
hedged or reduced their dollar bond
holdings
partially in response to some overheated
rhetoric around Greenland.
>> Yeah.
>> On the other hand,
unambiguous evidence because of some
silly changes in regulation that had a
big impact, that the Taiwanese lifers
reduced their hedge ratio by a really
big number.
>> Mhm.
>> And the Japanese lifers continued to
see, you know, like they let their hedge
ratio slip cuz hedging is costly in
Taiwan. It's costly in Japan. And you
haven't been rewarded for hedging
because the currencies have stayed weak.
And in fact, in Taiwan when you reduce
the hedge ratio, that works as a bid for
the dollar and it pushes the dollar back
up and pushes the Taiwan dollar down. So
you it becomes self-reinforcing circular
Soros reflexivity. So you see parts of
the global economy that are hedging.
You see parts of the global economy that
have really reduced their hedge ratio,
just gone all in long dollar fixed
income.
And you see parts of the global economy
that are less comfortable holding dollar
fixed income, but they are absolutely
unwilling to be underweight US equities.
And so what you really end up seeing is
not de-dollarization,
it's just more a little bit of a
rotation towards holding US equities and
a little less bonds.
>> Going back to sovereign wealth funds and
just think about them abstractly, you
know, countries particularly
big commodity exporters have various
good reasons to have sovereign wealth
funds. Their uh revenues are going to be
very volatile and cyclical and so you
want to smooth them out. In some
instances though, one factor is that you
have these countries that get incredible
dollar inflows, but don't really have
big domestic industries and so you can't
spend it all domestically without
creating a lot of inflation. But now we
see in the Gulf countries in particular
that there is just a lot more domestic
economic activity happening, period. We
know that sort of Abu Dhabi and Dubai
are just
growing bustling cities in their own
right and so there is actually
opportunity there might be domestic
capacity. We know that Saudi, you know,
they're trying all kinds of stuff from
we've talked about this in the past from
soccer teams to
mile-long, multi-mile-long cities in a
vertical in a horizontal line or
whatever. But just generally, does the
growth of some of these countries, just
in terms of domestic economic activity
changed the calculus about how some of
these revenues are used. It's like, "Oh,
we can actually deploy this domestically
in a productive way, maybe by building
data centers and so forth, that it won't
just be we're going to add to
inflation."
>> Well, we can debate about whether yet
another data center is going to truly
prove productive. Our AI tech barons
certainly believe it to be.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> But there is a scenario where they've
kind of
drunk their own Kool-Aid and are
overbuilding data centers.
You know, Saudi Arabia's a great
example. The line looks like it's not
going to be a line, it's scaled back.
The desert ski resort with artificial
snow is no more. That's been canceled.
Everything was sort of getting pulled
back in.
Uh well, not everything. There's like
the big Cuban riyal, I guess it's still
going forward. But yes, it did
fundamentally change Saudi Arabia when
MBS came and said, "I am going to throw
a ton of money
into domestic development, basically
real estate, but also sports,
entertainment, da da da, da, da, da,
combined with some social liberalization
around women's role in society."
Huge change. And what it in practical
terms meant, and I I people some people
use the fiscal break even, I think
fiscal spending some things can be kept
off budget. I prefer to just look at the
good old-fashioned balance of payments.
The balance of payments break even of
Saudi
went from 60 to 90 to 100. So, in order
to have a current account surplus that
needs to be invested abroad, the Saudis
now need an oil price of roughly 95.
They did not get that last year. So,
they were running budget deficits, they
were running a current account deficit,
which was financed by borrowing from the
world, and since MBS not only wanted to
do all these domestic economic
developments, he wanted to play in the
big boy league with the Emiratis and
trip you know
do big investments in the US and be
chums with Donald Trump.
The Saudis in order to do all that, buy
equities, da da da da, as well as build
all the
domestic projects, they borrowed 100
billion last year.
They were the biggest borrower in the
emerging world. So, if you don't have
the level of wealth that the Emiratis or
the Qataris have,
you will find yourself in a position
where you are no longer a source of
petrodollars. You're a drain on the
world's eurodollar system, and the
Saudis have flipped and become a drain
on eurodollars.
The Emiratis can do whatever the hell
they want. I mean, the Emiratis just
have so much money and so few people.
So few people as in Emirati-born Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> residents who have a claim on the oil
surplus, not the high-end I know Tracy
you were high-end guest worker when you
were in Dubai.
Uh and the low-end
>> and guest workers who do not or don't
have a claim on the oil.
>> And so, the Emiratis are just in a
position you know, in some sense the
Emiratis can uh
uh they are they're like uh the
Rockefellers if they had not given their
money away.
Uh they wouldn't actually need to run an
oil field in order to invest in all
sorts of things just cuz they'd made so
much money from oil over the past 50
years that they can just become
investors.
>> Mhm.
The Rockefellers if they hadn't uh
donated to the Council on Foreign
Relations.
>> That's right. They spent all the money.
>> I'm I'm very happy that they gave some
away.
>> We all are very happy. Um okay. So, I
realize
in this conversation we haven't talked
at all about Europe yet, and it feels
like lately whenever we do talk about
Europe the only certainty is always that
like it's going to come out in a worse
position than it was before. If you're
looking at Europe right now with the
additional burden of higher energy, with
all the focus on AI, with China's export
boom. Is Europe just inevitably in a
structurally weaker place than it was
before?
>> Yeah, not enormously. You know, at the
margin losing Qatari gas means they're
going to become more dependent on
American gas. They're not thrilled with
that. They're of course not thrilled
with any increase in oil price.
But where we are now, this is a
manageable shock. This is a much much
smaller shock than the loss of Russian
pipeline gas in '22, which I think we
underestimate how big of a shock that
was to the European economy.
So I don't know that this particular
shock
is enormously negative to Europe. It is
modestly negative cuz Europe's a net
importer of 12 million barrels of oil.
So, you know, every $10 lose 40 billion
on the current account.
Europe is wealthy enough it can afford
that. It's not going to
impinge them.
It causes political problems when gas
prices go up. The Germans want to cut
fuel taxes to offset that like, you
know, as rich countries sometimes do.
I don't think it fundamentally changes
much about Europe. It does highlight
fossil fuel dependence cuz whereas
Europe is fossil fuel light, it does add
to pressure to do more nukes, to be more
serious about renewables.
And it certainly doesn't help
Europe figure out how to respond to the
China shock, which I think is a much
bigger shock to Europe than at least
this kind of petroleum shock. I mean,
and then the other baseline problem,
which we'll see if it's solvable or not
solvable,
is that you know, we're going to be in a
world where missile interceptors are
constrained and there's going to be a
scramble to make missile interceptors.
And the US is going to be even less
willing to provide missile interceptors
to Ukraine. So we're in a world where
Europe its missile defense will have to
come from its own production to a much
greater degree, which is uh arguably a
positive for long-term development, but
it does create a near-term sense of
vulnerability.
But I think I think the
the central shock in this case is going
to be much more heavily felt in oil
importing Asia.
>> Yeah.
So, you know, you talked about the high
bar that would have to clear for some
meaningful change and you know, the
dollar's role in the global economy or
you know, the dollar's dominant, etc.
But setting like look, we have a there's
a widespread view around the world that
the US has become
a very reckless nation, right? I mean,
like there's these complaints why why
does global policy, the past prospect of
a war being started by the US depend on
what 10,000 voters in Michigan and
Wisconsin and other people, you know,
this is some quote from some European
every how they view things every four
years. We've been extremely hostile to
formal allies for reasons that most
people around the world can't
comprehend. The Greenland
>> I could tell you were not on board with
Canada becoming our 51st state. I'm
disappointed.
>> Canada is a great example. The Greenland
disease, like these things just pile up,
right? And so like even like setting
aside the and then of course now there
is this current war which most countries
are clearly not on board with, hard to
understand. Most people most countries
don't really understand what the goal
was. It may end up being a huge own goal
if it permanently gives Iran it's
unclear what's going to happen.
Could these things pile up in such a way
such that look, setting aside these
flows, the US ends up being kind of a
trans mortar as a global pariah. We know
that polls about the US's favorability
continue to decline throughout much of
the world, etc.
How sustainable is it to have the dollar
as a reserve global currency, the thing
that everything is priced in, if so much
of the world essentially views the US as
a rogue state?
>> When it's framed in those rhetorical
terms,
it almost feels like, you know, the only
possible answer is that the dollar will
become less dominant in global
transactions.
And as I mentioned,
as a share of cross-border financial
assets, the equity share is bigger than
the reserve share. It's not no longer
just the flows The flows coming from
holding safe reserves are nowhere near
big enough to have a net international
investment position of negative 100 or
even a net debt position of negative 50.
So, you you can certainly make that
argument. I can also make an argument
that before the Iran war, China, because
it was un-
>> willing to let its currency adjust,
>> Yeah.
>> was intervening in the foreign exchange
market to the tune of a hundred billion
dollars a month, and that a hundred
billion dollars was flowing into
dollars.
So, it
unless China changes how it manages its
currency, and this is a much bigger flow
than anything
around petrodollars.
>> Mhm.
>> And it was a hard to track flows going
into bank funding markets, so forth and
so on. But, in some sense, until China,
which doesn't didn't love the US before,
decides that it is willing to change how
it manages its currency and how it
manages its economy,
it is compelled to go into the market
and buy if its exporters want to convert
dollars for yuan. And when its exporters
are not converting dollars for yuan,
they are still holding dollars. Now,
they could hold euros, but if they hold
euros, you know, they get less interest.
So, it hinges on a little bit more than
just global perceptions of the US.
>> Okay.
>> The Chinese have not loved the US for a
long time. The Chinese have not found a
way to really extricate themselves from
a world where they often need to really
buy a lot of dollars and add dollars to
their system.
Like the world doesn't love China, I
think. China can be a coercive power.
You know, President Trump basically had
a theory
around last year's trade negotiations,
which in the to put it in this year's
terms, he wanted other countries to pay
a toll for access to the US consumer
market.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh they should be giving us things
because, you know, this is our world's
greatest market. The Chinese have wanted
people to pay a political toll
treating China with the great nation
with respect, not criticizing the CCP,
various other things to have access to
certain industrial products, rare
earths. And it sometimes have suggested,
well, you cannot criticize us on trade.
You not show us respect because uh
otherwise uh those permanent magnet
licenses won't come. So, they extract a
toll. They are uh can be coercive. Think
of how they treated Australia
after the Australians said some impolite
things about China's handling of COVID.
Yet, it is very, very difficult for most
countries around the world to respond by
not trading with China.
>> Right.
>> So, I think in the foreseeable future
countries may not respect the US. They
may view the US as a reckless and a
rogue power.
But you can still use our dollar to
transact between Africa and Latin
America efficiently.
And that will not be viewed as a
political statement. It'll just be
viewed as the most efficient way of
getting something done. So, So kind of
how I would expect things. Now, I do
think
we are in a world where an enormous
share of the world's financial wealth,
both people looking for safety, the
reserve assets, people people looking
for a bit more yield than you can get
out of a safe G10 government bond, the
private credit CLO world,
and then people wanting the equity home
runs, all those investors globally are
now quite overweight US assets.
And as a result, the dollar is quite
strong. And so to me, the core question
is not really whether the geopolitics
will change things. Assuming we don't
get into a full-on blow-up with Europe,
which would, I think,
accelerate some shifts. I think the real
question is is this intense overweight
in the dollar sustainable
when we have fairly reckless policies?
And the answer so far has been yes.
>> Brad Setser, thank you so much for
coming back on the show. Really
appreciate it.
>> No, thanks for having me again.
>> Thanks, Brad. That was fantastic.
>> Hopefully, this is like, you know, now
every episode is going to get ranked.
And I was like,
yeah, that was probably one of his worst
>> We should have We'll have the community
vote.
>> Nothing like and I know I'm never going
to hit Taiwan life or
>> Yeah, no. This was a good one. It was a
good one. Excellent.
>> Joe, always good talking to Brad.
>> Always good.
>> You know, one thing that struck me in
that last answer, he mentioned the word
toll
>> Yeah.
>> quite a lot. You know, the idea of China
trying to extract a political toll, now
potential tolls in the Strait of Hormuz.
And I've been thinking about that a lot
because, you know, if we if we think
about the
Back in 2022,
>> Yeah.
>> I wrote a piece called Chokepoint
Capitalism. And it was the idea that
governments around the world were waking
up to the importance of strategic supply
and this idea that because of COVID, you
have to have a certain independency in
important things. And I think like we're
starting to see that kind of translate
into the geopolitical sphere in terms of
like
power nowadays is basically being able
to control those choke points, right?
And so a lot of diplomacy, a lot of
geopolitics is now focused on, you know,
Trump is going to affect the
a choke point in semiconductors or a
choke point in the world's oil supply.
Yeah.
>> I don't know if I'm saying that right,
but like there's something there.
>> Well, I mean, I thought it was
interesting so Brett talking about, you
know, Europe is going to have to spend
more money on missile defense, for
example. The US is going to be less
reliable, stocks are being depleted,
etc. This is like the phenomenon of our
time, which is that every region every
country or at least every region feels
that it has to spend on its own, right?
The capacity of another nation that it
may have assumed it could trade with
will not necessarily be reliable. The
other thing I was thinking that I've
been thinking a lot about is, okay,
Chinese manufacturing dominance is a
very thoroughly discussed issue in the
US and Europe, right?
But it's not it doesn't really get as
much attention in the rest of the world.
So, you know, you don't hear about, for
example, the effect of Chinese exports
in undermining Mexican exporters nearly
as much or Brazilian exporters, etc.
These are also countries that are trying
to climb
>> we were in Mexico or Brazil, but yeah.
>> Right, I agree. But the the upshot is, I
think because we are in a sort of
US-Europe dominated media landscape, we
mostly hear about China as a sort of
pressure point to rich countries. That
we are not discussing the fact that also
there is going to be this domestic
stress that will emerge from
manufacturers in these countries. In
other words, what I'm saying is
you look at the rest of the world and
you say, "Well, they're going to pivot
to China because the US is this reckless
rogue state, etc." Except that they're
all going to be facing the same
>> The same issue.
>> The same issues as the US and Europe
are. We're just not talking about them
because
that's not the center of our
conversation. But the idea of like,
"Okay, it's very obvious for Mexico or
Brazil or any or Kazakhstan or whoever
else to quote pivot to China, whatever
that means." They're facing all of these
same issues in many cases as well.
>> Yeah. I think the middle power theory
gets really interesting in that context.
Um anyway, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our guest
Brad Setser at Brad_Setser.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Armon, Dash Bennett at Dashbot,
and Caleb Brooks at Caleb Brooks. And
for all Odd Lots content, go to
bloomberg.com/oddlots.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. You can chat about all
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/oddlots.
>> And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
it when we have mildly annoyed Brad
Setser on the podcast, then please leave
us a positive review on your favorite
podcast platform. And remember, if you
are a Bloomberg subscriber, you can
listen to all of our episodes absolutely
ad free. All you need to do is find the
Bloomberg channel on Apple Podcasts and
follow the instructions there. Thanks
for listening.
>> Woo!
Woo!